---
layout: post
title: "C Implementation of a Linux-Compatible EXT-2 Filesystem"
date:   2018-06-11 20:29:18 -0100
tags: code
---

#### This project was very difficult but very rewarding. 

This was the first of two courses I took from the only professor
I think I ever had who wrote the textbook for the class. The goal of this course was to
understand how the EXT-2 filesystem works by implementing some of its core functionality.
EXT-2 is not the most modern form of the filesystem (which is now up to ext-4), but as the
first commercial quality Linux FS in 1993, it's a great place to start teaching us the
basics of -nix. I also think the professor uses a computer made no later than 1998,
which may be a factor.

The assignemnt essentially boiled down to implementing a few of the shell commands used
for file system changes and the underlying logic in C.

Those commands included cd, ls, pwd, stat, mkdir, rmdir, creat, touch, link, symlink, rm, and unlink. Those commands relied on some lower-level functions like iget, iput, search, ialloc for dealing with inodes and traversing the filesystem.

Most of these commands are accomplished with some combination of parsing a filepath, finding the inode for a file/folder, and performing some allocation or deallocation of disk blocks.

The rmdir command is a good example, used for deleting folders. This command does not include
the ability to recursively delete the contents of a folder, so it does a check for folder contents in the bottom half. This section also features some logic that comes up in most of these
commands with some slight variations, where a while loop is used to iterate specifically through 
the blocks in memory based on record size, since files are rarely the same size.

{% highlight c %}
int my_rmdir(char *pathname)
{
    char *cp, namebuf[256], parentPath[256], childPath[256],
    pathCpy1[256], pathCpy2[256], buf[BLKSIZE];
    MINODE *parent, *toRemove;
    int pino, rino, i;

    if (pathname[0] == 0)
    {
        printf("need a path, dude\n");
        return;
    }

    strcpy(pathCpy1, pathname);
    strcpy(pathCpy2, pathname);

    // Get parent and child pathnames
    strcpy(parentPath, dirname(pathCpy1));
    strcpy(childPath, basename(pathCpy2));

    printf("Parent: %s, Child: %s\n", parentPath, childPath);

    pino = getino(fd, parentPath);
    rino = getino(fd, childPath);

    // Make sure both are valid
    if (pino == 0 || rino == 0)
    {
        printf("your path was not valid\n");
        return;
    }

    parent = iget(fd, pino); // Containing dir MINODE
    toRemove = iget(fd, rino);

    if (!S_ISDIR(toRemove->INODE.i_mode))
    {
        printf("it's gotta be a dir, dude\n");
    }

    // CHECK IF DIR IS EMPTY
    if(toRemove->INODE.i_links_count == 2) // dirs usualy have two links
    {
        for(i = 0; i <= 11; i++) // loops through direct blocks
        {
            if(toRemove->INODE.i_block[i])
            {
                get_block(toRemove->dev, toRemove->INODE.i_block[i], buf); 
                cp = buf;
                dp = (DIR *)buf;

                while(cp < &buf[BLKSIZE])
                {
                    strncpy(namebuf, dp->name, dp->name_len);
                    namebuf[dp->name_len] = 0;

                    if(strcmp(namebuf, ".") && strcmp(namebuf, ".."))
                    {
                        printf("Can't remove dir with crap in it!\n");
                        return;
                    }
                    cp+=dp->rec_len;
                    dp=(DIR *)cp;
                }
            }
        }
    }

    reduce(fd, toRemove);
    iput(toRemove);
    idealloc(fd, toRemove->ino);
    deleteChild(parent, childPath);

    return 0;
    }
{% endhighlight %}


Prior to this course, I had decent knowledge of shell commands and filesystems, but I didn't have
any experience with the low level concepts of how the filesystem operates. It was eye-opening to
get a real understanding of how much behind-the-scenes work goes on to maintain a filesystem. For
a very long time now, there's been no real need to be familiar with inodes, memory blocks, file descriptors, etc.
but having this knowledge has given me a new appreciation for what really goes on closer to the metal.

Perhaps the most valuable practice that came from this project however was the extensive use of C. Some of my early
introductory classes used C, but it wasn't until this project that I had to really dig down and understand the language
and learn how to do higher level things like managing pointers or writing directly to a disk. 

This course was widely known among CS students to be one of, if not the hardest courses we had to take for our degrees,
and I lemented its eventuality, but once it was over I found it incredibly satisfying. There's not much else that I've found
that matches programming's satisfaction, and this project provided that in droves.












